# 101: Stocks Versus Other Investments
## Introduction
We all have financial goals in life: to pay for college for our children, to be able to retire by a
reasonable age, to buy the things we want. Unfortunately, spending less than we earn is typically
not enough for us to reach our goals. We have to do more; we have to invest our savings and put
our money to work. Stocks are quite simply one of the best ways to make your investment dollars
work the hardest.

Investing in stocks is not rocket science. The only real characteristics shared among successful
stock investors are basic math skills, a critical eye, patience, and discipline. Combine these with
an understanding of how money flows and how businesses compete with one another, along
with a dash of accounting knowledge, and you have all the mental tools needed to get started.
We will teach you all these in this workbook series.

Although you don't need an advanced college degree to invest in stocks, selecting stocks is
nevertheless an intellectual exercise. It requires effort, but it can bear many fruits. After all,
investing in stocks not only leads to potentially higher returns on your investment dollars, it also
leads to a greater understanding of how the world works.

##What Is a Stock?

Perhaps the most common misperception among new investors is that stocks are simply pieces of
paper to be traded. This is simply not the case. In stock investing, trading is a means, not an end.
A stock is an ownership interest in a company. A business is started by a person or small group of
people who put their money in. How much of the business each founder owns is a function of
how much money each invested. At this point, the company is considered "private." Once a
business reaches a certain size, the company may decide to "go public" and sell a chunk of itself
to the investing public. This is how stocks are created.

When you buy a stock, you become a business owner. Period. Over the long term, the value of
that ownership stake will rise and fall according to the success of the underlying business. The
better the business does, the more your ownership stake will be worth.

##Why Invest in Stocks
Stocks are but one of many possible ways to invest your hard-earned money. Why choose stocks
instead of other options, such as bonds, rare coins, or antique sports cars? Quite simply, the
reason that savvy investors invest in stocks is that they provide the highest potential returns. And
over the long term, no other type of investment tends to perform better.

On the downside, stocks tend to be the most volatile investments. This means that the value of
stocks can drop in the short term. Sometimes stock prices may even fall for a protracted period.
For instance, the 10-year return for the S&P 500 was slightly negative as recently as late 2010,
largely due to the 2008 financial crisis and the early 2000s tech bubble bursting. Bad luck or bad
timing can easily sink your returns, but you can minimize this by taking a long-term investing
approach.

There's also no guarantee you will actually realize any sort of positive return. If you have the
misfortune of consistently picking stocks that decline in value, you can lose money, even over the
long term!

Of course, we think that by educating yourself and using the knowledge in this Investing
Classroom, you can make the risk acceptable relative to your expected reward. We will help you
pick the right businesses to own and help you spot the ones to avoid. Again, this effort is well
worth it, because over the long haul, your money can work harder for you in equities than in just
about any other investment.

##Your Investment Choices

Let's see how stocks stack up to some of your other investment options:
Mutual Funds. Stock mutual funds can offer similar returns to investing in stocks on your
own, but without all the extra work. When you invest in a fund, your money is pooled
with that of other investors, and then it is managed by a group of professionals w ho try
to earn a return by selecting stocks for the pool.

Beyond requiring much less effort, one key advantage of funds is that they can be less
volatile. Simple statistics says that a portfolio is going to experience less volatility than
the individual components of the portfolio. After all, individual stocks can and
sometimes do go to zero, but if a mutual fund held 50 stocks, it would be very unlikely
that all 50 of those stocks become worthless.

The flipside of this reduced volatility is that fund returns can be muted relative to
individual stocks. In investing, risk and return are intimately correlated—reduce one,
and odds are you will reduce the other. Another disadvantage to offloading all the effort
of picking individual stocks is that you must pay someone else for this service. The
professionals running mutual funds do not do so for free. They charge fees, and fees eat
into returns.

Plus, the more money you have invested in mutual funds, the larger the absolute value
of fees you will pay every year. For instance, paying 1% a year in fees on a $1,000
portfolio is not a big deal, but it's a much larger deal if the portfolio is worth $500,000. In
the past, mutual funds often made the most sense for those with relatively small
amounts to invest because they were the most cost-efficient. But with the advent of $10
(or less) per-trade commissions on stocks, this is no longer necessarily the case.

Just as picking the wrong stock is a risk, so is picking the wrong fund. What if the group
of people you selected to manage your investment does not perform well? Just like
stocks, there is no guarantee of a return in mutual funds.

It's also worth noting that investing in a mix of mutual funds and stocks can be a
perfectly prudent strategy. Stocks versus funds (or any other investment vehicle) need
not be an either/or proposition.

Bonds. At their most basic, bonds are loans. When you buy a bond, you become a lender
to an institution, and that institution pays you interest. As long as the institution does
not go bankrupt, it will also pay back the principal on the bond, but no more than the
principal.

There are two basic types of bonds: government bonds and corporate bonds. U.S.
government bonds (otherwise known as T-bills or Treasuries) are issued and guaranteed
by Uncle Sam. They typically offer a modest return with low risk. Corporate bonds are
issued by companies and carry a higher degree of risk (should the company default) as
well as return.

Bond investors must also consider interest rate risk. When prevailing in terest rates rise,
the market value of existing bonds tends to fall. (The opposite is also true.) The only way
to alleviate interest rate risk is by holding the bond to maturity. Investing in corporate
bonds also tends to require just as much homework as stock investing, yet bonds
generally have lower returns.

Given their lower risk, there is certainly a place for bonds or bond mutual funds in most
portfolios, but their relative safety comes with the price of lower expected returns
compared with stocks over the long term.

Real Estate. Most people's homes are indeed their largest investments. We all have to
live somewhere, and a happy side effect is that real estate tends to appreciate in value
over time. But if you are going to use real estate as a true inve stment vehicle by buying a
second home, a piece of land, or a rental property, it's important to keep the following
in mind.

First, despite the strong historical appreciation, real estate can and does decline in
value, as the home price bubble painfully demonstrated to Americans in 2008. Second,
real estate taxes will constantly eat into returns. Third, real estate owners must worry
about physically maintaining their properties or must pay someone else to do it. Likewise,
they often must deal with tenants and collect rents. Finally, real estate is rather illiquid
and takes time to sell—a potential problem if you need your money back quickly.

Some people do nothing but invest their savings in real estate and do quite well. But just
as stock investing requires effort, so does real estate investing.

Bank Savings Accounts. The problem with bank savings accounts and certificates of
deposit is that they offer very low returns. The upside is that there is essentially zero
risk in these investment vehicles, and your principal is protected. These types of
accounts are fine as rainy-day funds—a place to park money for short-term spending
needs or for an emergency. But they really should not be viewed as long-term
investment vehicles.

The low returns of these investments are a problem because of inflation. For instance, if
you get a 3% return on a savings account, but inflation is also dropping the buying power
of your dollar by 3% a year, you really aren't making any money. Your real return (return
adjusted for inflation) is zero, meaning that your money is not really working for you.

##The Bottom Line

Though investing in stocks may indeed require more work and carry a higher degree of
risk compared with other investment opportunities, you cannot ignore the higher
potential return that stocks provide. And as we will show in the next lesson, given
enough time, a slight ly higher return on your investments can lead to dramatically larger
dollar sums for whatever your financial goals in life may be.