#107:介绍财务报表
##简介
　　尽管“财务报表”和“会计”这类的商业语言足以让许多人望而却步，但在购买股票之前你还是需要知道这一点商业语言的。你不需要成为一个注册会计师就能理解三个最基本也是最重要的财务报表:损益表、资产负债表和现金流量表。在公司的年度报告、10-K和10-Q文件中都可以找到这三种报表。

　　财务报表是了解公司业绩和健康状况的窗口。我们将在本课中对每个财务报表提供一个非常基本的概述，并在第301-303课中详细说明。

##损益表
　　损益表是什么，我为什么要关注它？

　　损益表告诉你一个公司的收入(它的收入)，它花了多少钱(它的花费)，以及两者之间的差额(它的利润)。损益表会显示一个公司在一段时间内的收入和支出，这段时间一般是三个月或一年。这份报表包含了你在媒体或财务报告中经常看到的信息——如总收入、净收入或每股收益。

The income statement answers the question, "How well is the company's business performing?" Or in simpler terms, "Is it making money?" A firm must be able to bring in more money than it spends or it won't be in business for very long. Firms with low expenses relative to revenues--and thus, high profits relative to revenues--are particularly desirable for investment because a bigger piece of each dollar the company brings in directly benefits you as a shareholder.

　　损益表回答了这样一个问题:“公司的业绩表现如何?”或者用更简单的术语来说，“它赚钱吗?”一个公司必须能够带来比它所花费的更多的钱，否则从商业角度来说它不会存活很长时间的。相对于收入而言，相对于收入而言，成本较低的公司尤其值得投资，因为公司带来的每一美元的更大一部分直接给你带来了股东的利益。

Revenues, Expenses, and Profit

Each of the three main elements of the income statement is described below.

Revenues. The revenue section is typically the simplest part of the income statement. Often, there is just a single 
number that represents all the money a company brought in during a specific time period, although big companies 
sometimes break down revenues in ways that provide more information (e.g., segregated by geographic location or 
business segment). Revenues are also commonly known as sales.

Expenses. Although there are many types of expenses, the two most common are the cost of sales and SG&A (selling, 
general, and administrative) expenses. Cost of sales, which is also called cost of goods sold, is the expense most 
directly involved in creating revenue. For example, Gap GPS may pay $10 to make a shirt, which it sells for $15. 
When it is sold, the cost of sales for that shirt would be $10--what it cost Gap to produce the shirt for sale. Selling, 
general, and administrative expenses are also commonly known as operating expenses. This category includes most other 
costs in running a business, including marketing, management salaries, and technology expenses.

Profits. In its simplest form, profit is equal to total revenues minus total expenses. However, there are several 
commonly used profit subcategories investors should be aware of. Gross profit is calculated as revenues minus cost 
of sales. It basically shows how much money is left over to pay for operating expenses (and hopefully provide profit 
to stockholders) after a sale is made. Using our example of the Gap shirt before, the gross profit from the sale of 
the shirt would have been $5 ($15 sales price - $10 cost of sales = $5 gross profit). Operating profit is equal to 
revenues minus the cost of sales and SG&A. This number represents the profit a company made from its actual operations, 
and excludes certain expenses and revenues that may not be related to its central operations. Net income generally 
represents the company's profit after all expenses, including financial expenses, have been paid. This number is 
often called the "bottom line" and is generally the figure people refer to when they use the word "profit" or "earnings." 
##The Balance Sheet
What is it and why do I care?

The balance sheet, also known as the statement of financial condition, basically tells you how much a company owns 
(its assets), and how much it owes (its liabilities). The difference between what it owns and what it owes is its 
equity, also commonly called "net assets," "stockholder's equity," or "net worth."

The balance sheet provides investors with a snapshot of a company's health as of the date provided on the financial 
statement. Generally, if a company has lots of assets relative to liabilities, it's in good shape. Conversely, just 
as you would be cautious loaning money to a friend who is burdened with large debts, a company with a large amount 
of liabilities relative to assets should be scrutinized more carefully.

Assets, Liabilities, and Equity

Each of the three primary elements of the balance sheet is described below.

Assets. There are two main types of assets: current assets and noncurrent assets. Within these two categories, there 
are numerous subcategories, many of which will be explained in Lesson 302. Current assets are likely to be used up or 
converted into cash within one business cycle--usually defined as one year. For example, the groceries at your local 
supermarket would be classified as current assets because apples and bananas should be sold within the next year. Noncurrent 
assets are defined by our left-brained accountant friends as, you guessed it, anything not classified as a current 
asset. For example, the refrigerators at your supermarket would be classified as noncurrent assets because it's 
unlikely they will be "used up" or converted to cash within a year.

Liabilities. Similar to assets, there are two main categories of liabilities: current liabilities and noncurrent 
liabilities. Current liabilities are obligations the firm must pay within a year. For example, your supermarket may 
have bought and received $1,000 worth of eggs from a local farm but won't pay for them until next month. Noncurrent 
liabilities are the flip side of noncurrent assets. These liabilities represent money the company owes one year or more 
in the future. For example, the grocer may borrow $1 million from a bank for a new store, which it must pay back in five years.

Equity. Equity represents the part of the company that is owned by shareholders; thus, it's commonly referred to as 
shareholder's equity. As described above, equity is equal to total assets minus total liabilities. Although there are 
several categories within equity, the two biggest are paid-in capital and retained earnings. Paid-in capital is the 
amount of money shareholders paid for their shares when the stock was first offered to the public. It basically 
represents how much money the firm received when it sold its shares. Retained earnings represent the total profits 
the company has earned since it began, minus whatever has been paid to shareholders as dividends. Since this is a 
cumulative number, if a company has lost money over time, retained earnings can be negative and would be renamed "accumulated deficit." 
##The Statement of Cash Flows
What is it and why do I care?

The statement of cash flows tells you how much cash went into and out of a company during a specific time frame such 
as a quarter or a year. You may wonder why there's a need for such a statement because it sounds very similar to the 
income statement, which shows how much revenue came in and how many expenses went out.

The difference lies in a complex concept called accrual accounting. Accrual accounting requires companies to record 
revenues and expenses when transactions occur, not when cash is exchanged. While that explanation seems simple enough, 
it's a big mess in practice, and the statement of cash flows helps investors sort it out.

The statement of cash flows is very important to investors because it shows how much actual cash a company has 
generated. The income statement, on the other hand, often includes noncash revenues or expenses, which the statement 
of cash flows excludes.

One of the most important traits you should seek in a potential investment is the firm's ability to generate 
cash. Many companies have shown profits on the income statement but stumbled later because of insufficient cash 
flows. A good look at the statement of cash flows for those companies may have warned investors that rocky times 
were ahead.

The Three Elements of the Statement of Cash Flows

Because companies can generate and use cash in several different ways, the statement of cash flows is separated 
into three sections: cash flows from operating activities, from investing activities, and from financing activities.

The cash flows from operating activitiessection shows how much cash the company generated from its core business, 
as opposed to peripheral activities such as investing or borrowing. Investors should look closely at how much cash 
a firm generates from its operating activities because it paints the best picture of how well the business is producing 
cash that will ultimately benefit shareholders.

The cash flows from investing activitiessection shows the amount of cash firms spent on investments. Investments are 
usually classified as either capital expenditures--money spent on items such as new equipment or anything else needed 
to keep the business running--or monetary investments such as the purchase or sale of money market funds.

The cash flows from financing activitiessection includes any activities involved in transactions with the company's 
owners or debtors. For example, cash proceeds from new debt, or dividends paid to investors would be found in this section.

Free cash flow is a term you will become very familiar with over the course of these workbooks. In simple terms, it 
represents the amount of excess cash a company generated, which can be used to enrich shareholders or invest in new 
opportunities for the business without hurting the existing operations; thus, it's considered "free." Although there 
are many methods of determining free cash flow, the most common method is taking the net cash flows provided by 
operating activities and subtacting capital expenditures (as found in the "cash flows from investing activities" 
section).

Cash from Operations - Capital Expenditures = Free Cash Flow
##The Bottom Line
Phew!!! You made it through an entire lesson about financial statements. While we're the first to acknowledge that 
there are far more exciting aspects about investing in stocks than learning about accounting and financial 
statements, it's essential for investors to know the language of business. We also recommend you sharpen your newfound 
language skills by taking a good look at the more-detailed discussion on financial statements in Lessons 301-303.
