#402: 使用比率和倍数
##简介

　　既然我们已经回顾了股票估值的基本知识以及为什么它很重要，现在是时候深入了解具体估值方法的细节了。正如我们在上节课中所讨论的，最常见的股票估值方法涉及股票市场价格与基础公司业绩要素(盈利、销售、账面价值等)之间的比率。比率很受投资者的欢迎，因为它很容易计算，而且在大多数金融网站和报纸上都能轻易找到。

　　虽然估值比率已经变得无处不在，但重要的是要认识到它们的优势和劣势，估值比率是方便的工具，可以让你进行快速而粗略的分析，但它们都需要大量的上下文才能发挥作用。
　　
　　在这节课中，我们将再次回顾最广泛使用的估值比率，并讨论如何将它们纳入您的思维。我们在第108课中谈到了这个主题的大部分内容，但是这节课将会更深入。一旦你完全理解了估值比率的承诺和陷阱，我们将在下一课继续讨论更高级的估值方法。

##市销率(价格/销售(P/S))

　　最基本的估值比率之一是市盈率。市盈率等于股票市场价格除以每股销售额。

　　P/S = 股价 / 每股销售额

　　市销率的好处是，销售是相当固定的数字，不受会计假设和操纵的影响，就像盈利一样。虽然企业可以利用会计技巧来提高销售额，但要做通过会计技巧到这一点要困难得多，而真正提高销售额要容易得多。此外，销售不像收益那样波动，因为一次性费用或收益可能暂时抑制或提高收益。此外，经济周期性公司的利润可能会因年而异，但销售额是一个更稳定的基准。此外，市盈率可以用于那些没有正收益的公司。

　　相对平稳的销售使得市销率有助于通过比较当前市销率和历史市销率来快速评估盈利高度可变的公司。市销率也是分析同一行业公司的一个有用工具，尤其是当一家公司的盈利可能不稳定或根本没有盈利的时候。例如，到2010年，AMR Corp(美国航空公司的母公司)在金融危机和经济大衰退之后已经损失了数十亿美元，其市销率作为一种估值技术毫无用处。然而，将联合航空公司(United Air Lines UAL)的市销率0.1倍与西南航空(Southwest LUV)的市销率0.8倍进行比较，似乎可以发现市场上存在着巨大的定价差异。然而，市销率应该谨慎使用。在这个例子中，进一步的分析将表明AMR正面临流动性危机并走向破产。与此同时，西南航空的低成本结构和燃料对冲使其能够连续35年实现运营利润。

##市销率的缺点

　　尽管有一些优点，市销率有一些局限性。一个主要的缺点是销售额可能不是过多就是过少，这取决于公司的盈利能力。如果一家公司的销售额达到数十亿美元，但每笔交易都在赔钱，我们将很难确定合适的市销率，因为我们不知道这家公司能创造多少利润(如果有的话)。

　　我们将重申，在使用市销率时，重要的是要记住，收益中的一美元的价值等于创造这一美元所需的销售额。因此，一家高利润的公司的一美元的销售额比利润率较低的公司的一美元的销售额更值钱。因此，市销率通常只在比较某个行业或具有类似盈利水平的行业内的公司时有用，或在长期观察单个公司时有用。

##市净率(价格/账面价值(P/B))

　　市净率将股票的市场价格与其账面价值进行比较。(账面价值是公司资产负债表上的权益余额除以已发行股票的数量。)保守的投资者通常更喜欢市净率，因为它比收益更能体现公司的价值。传奇投资者本杰明•格雷厄姆(Benjamin Graham)是沃伦•巴菲特(Warren Buffett)的导师之一，他是股票账面价值和市净率的大力倡导者。(有关本·格雷厄姆的更多信息，请参阅第504课。)

There are caveats to using P/B, just as there are for all the other simple ratios we will discuss. The carrying value of an asset on a company's balance sheet may not reflect the true value of the asset. For example, a future charge to write down the value of an overvalued asset could dramatically reduce a firm's book value and change the P/B in one swipe. On the other side of the coin, the book value of a company doesn't always accurately measure its true worth, especially for firms with lots of intangible assets such as patents, databases, and brand names that don't show up on the balance sheet. Some assets, like land, are also carried on a company's books at cost. If a company has held a property for a long time, chances are the value of the land is much greater than what its books state. 
The P/B ratio is also tied to return on equity (remember, ROE is equal to net income divided by average book value) in the same way that price/sales is tied to net margin (equal to net income divided by sales). Taking two companies that are otherwise equal, the one with a higher ROE will have a higher P/B ratio. 
The reason is clear--a firm that can compound book equity at a much higher rate is worth far more because absolute book value will increase more quickly.

Price/Earnings (P/E)

P/E is the most popular valuation ratio used by investors. It is equal to a stock's market price divided by the earnings per share for the most recent four quarters. The nice thing about P/E is that accounting earnings are a much better proxy for cash flow than sales. Moreover, earnings per share results and estimates about the future are easily available from just about any financial data source imaginable.
P/E = (Stock Price) / EPS
The P/E ratio measures how much investors are willing to pay for a company's earnings. Generally speaking, the higher the P/E ratio, the more investors are willing to pay for a dollar's worth of a company's earnings. Stocks with high P/Es (typically those with a P/E exceeding 30) usually have greater future growth prospects, while stocks with low P/Es (typically those with a P/E below 15) tend to have lesser future growth prospects. However, a P/E ratio by itself does not say much about a stock's valuation.
The most useful way to use a P/E ratio is to compare it with a certain benchmark. Good benchmarks are the P/E of another company in the same industry, the P/E of the entire market, or the same company's P/E at a different point in time. Each of these approaches has some value, as long as you know the limitations.
For example, a company that is trading at a lower P/E than its industry peers could be a good value, but even firms in the same industry can have very different capital structures, risk levels, and growth rates, all of which affect the P/E ratio. All else equal, a firm that has better growth prospects, lower risk, and lower capital reinvestment needs should be rewarded with a higher P/E ratio.
You can also compare a stock's P/E with the average P/E of the entire market. However, the same limitations of industry comparisons apply to this process as well. The stock you are investigating might be growing faster (or slower) than the average stock, or it might be riskier (or less risky). In general, comparing a company's P/E with those of industry peers or with the market has some value, but you should not rely on these approaches to make final buy or sell decisions.
Comparing a stock's current P/E with its historical P/E ratios can also be of value. This is especially true for stable firms that have not undergone major business shifts. If you find a solid company that is growing at roughly the same rate with roughly the same business prospects as in the past, but is trading at a lower P/E than its long-term average, you should start getting interested. It's entirely possible that the company's risk level or business outlook has changed, in which case a lower P/E is warranted, but it's also possible that the market is simply pricing the shares at an irrationally low level.
Price/Earnings: The Drawbacks
The P/E ratio also has some important drawbacks. A P/E ratio of 15 does not mean a whole lot by itself; it is neither good nor bad in a vacuum. As we discussed previously, the P/E ratio only becomes meaningful with context. 

However, keep in mind that using P/E ratios only on a relative basis means that your analysis can be skewed by the benchmark you are using. After all, there will be periods when entire industries will become overvalued. In 2000, an Internet stock with a P/E of 75 might have looked cheap when the rest of its peers had an average P/E of 200. In hindsight, neither the price of the stock nor the benchmark made sense. Just remember that being less expensive than a benchmark does not mean something is cheap, because the benchmark itself may be vastly overpriced. 

When you're looking at a P/E ratio, also make sure that the "E" part of the equation makes sense and is representative of a company's ongoing profits. A few things can distort the P/E ratio. First, firms that have recently sold off a business can have an artificially inflated "E" and a lower P/E as a result. A company may book a big one-time gain from the sale of a division, boosting reported earnings, but based on operating earnings, the stock may not be cheap at all. 

Second, reported earnings can sometimes be inflated (or depressed) by one-time accounting gains (or charges). As a result, the P/E ratio can be misleadingly high or low. For example, a firm's earnings can be depressed due to a one-time charge for litigation or other extraordinary events. This may in turn give the stock what appears to be a sky-high trailing P/E. 

Third, cyclical firms that go through boom and bust cycles--semiconductor companies and auto manufacturers are good examples--require a bit more investigation. Although you would typically think of a firm with a very low trailing P/E as cheap, this is precisely the wrong time to buy a cyclical firm because it means earnings have been very high in the recent past, which in turn means they are likely to fall off soon. Likewise, a cyclical stock is going to look the most expensive when its "E" has bottomed and is about to start growing again.
 
 Lastly, there are two kinds of P/Es--a trailing P/E, which uses the past four quarters' worth of earnings to calculate the ratio, and forward P/E, which uses analysts' estimates of the next four quarters' earnings to calculate the ratio. Because most companies are increasing earnings from year to year, the forward P/E is almost always lower than the trailing P/E, sometimes markedly for firms that are increasing earnings at a very rapid clip. Unfortunately, estimates of future earnings by Wall Street analysts--the consensus numbers you often read about--are consistently too optimistic. As a result, buying a stock because its forward P/E is low means counting on that future "E" to materialize in its entirety--and that usually doesn't happen.
 Price/Earnings Growth (PEG)
 As an offshoot of the P/E ratio, PEG is calculated by dividing a company's P/E by its growth rate. PEG is extremely popular with some investors because it seeks to relate the P/E to a piece of fundamental information--a company's growth rate. On the surface, this makes sense because a firm that is growing faster will be worth more in the future (all else being equal).
 PEG = (Forward P/E Ratio) / (5-Year EPS Growth Rate) 
 The problem with PEG is that risk and growth often go hand in glove--fast-growing firms tend to be riskier than average. This conflation of risk and growth is why PEG is frequently misused. When you use a PEG ratio alone to compare companies, you're basically assuming that all growth is equal, generated with the same amount of capital and the same amount of risk. 
 However, firms that are able to generate growth with less capital should be more valuable, as should firms that take on less risk. If you look at a stock that is expected to grow at 15% trading at 15 times earnings and another one that is expected to grow at 15% trading at 25 times earnings, don't just plunk your money down on the former because it has a lower PEG ratio. Look at the capital that each firm needs to invest to generate the expected growth, as well as the likelihood that those expectations will actually materialize, and you might very well wind up making a very different decision. But still, what PEG does give you is a quick and easy way to estimate the price you're paying for future growth.

 Yield-Based Valuation Models

 In addition to ratio-based measures, you can also use yield-based measures to value stocks. For example, if we invert the P/E and divide a firm's earnings per share by its market price, we get an earnings yield. If a stock sells for $40 per share and has $2 per share in earnings, then it has a P/E of 20 (40/2) but an earnings yield of 5% (2/40). Unlike P/Es, the nice thing about yields is that we can compare them with alternative investments, such as bonds, to see what kind of a return we can expect from each investment. One main difference, however, is that earnings generally grow over time, whereas bond payments are fixed.
 Let's put earnings yield into perspective. In October 2012, you could get a risk-free return from Uncle Sam of about 1.75% by buying a 10-year Treasury bond. Therefore, you would want to demand a higher rate of return from your stocks because they are riskier than Treasuries. A stock with a P/E of 25 would have an earnings yield of 4%, which is a better than Treasuries, but perhaps not enough considering the additional risk you are taking. It all depends on whether the company will be able to grow its profits in the future to make accepting a 4% yield today worthwhile.
 Meanwhile, a stock with a P/E of 12 would have an earnings yield of 8.3% (1/12), which is much better than those poky Treasuries, even if earnings never grow. Thus, in this situation you might be induced to take on the additional risk of owning the stock.
 Dividend Yield
 Dividend yield is actually one of the oldest valuation methods. It was very popular back in the days when dividends were the primary reason people owned stocks, and it is still widely used today, mainly among income-oriented investors. Dividend yield is equal to a company's annual dividend per share divided by a stock's market price. For example, a company that pays an annual dividend of $1.00 per share and trades for $20 has a dividend yield of 5% (1/20). If that same stock's price rose to $40 a share, its dividend yield would fall to 2.5%--the more expensive the stock, the lower the yield.
 Dividend Yield = (Annual Dividends Per Share) / (Stock Price)
 As with all valuation ratios, dividend yield must be used with caution. Stocks with very high dividend yields might seem like bargains, but these companies are often going through financial problems that have caused their stock price to plunge. It's not unusual for companies in such situations to cut their dividend in order to save cash, so their actual dividend yield going forward might be lower than the currently reported figure. Lastly, one major drawback of dividend yield is that it is useless for companies that don't pay a dividend--a group that includes many technology stocks.

 Cash Return
 The best yield-based valuation measure is a relatively little-known metric called cash return. In many ways, it's actually a more useful tool than the P/E ratio. You can calculate cash return by adding free cash flow (cash from operations minus capital expenditures) to net interest expense (interest expense minus interest income), and then dividing the sum by enterprise value  (market cap plus long-term debt, minus cash). We add back interest expense to free cash flow so that capital structure doesn't impact cash return.
 Cash Return = (Free Cash Flow + Net Interest Expense) / (Enterprise Value) 
 The goal of the cash return metric is to measure how efficiently the business is using its capital--both equity and debt--to generate free cash flow. In other words, cash return tells you how much free cash flow a company generates as a percentage of how much it would cost an investor to buy out the entire business.
 Let's use networking giant Cisco Systems (CSCO) as an example of how to use cash return to find reasonably valued investments. In October 2012, Cisco had a market cap of about $90.9 billion and carried $16.3 billion in long-term debt and $9.8 billion in cash on its balance sheet. Its enterprise value was $90.9 + $16.3 - $9.8, or $97.4 billion. That gives us the first part of our ratio. The other half is free cash flow, adjusted for interest expense. In fiscal 2012, Cisco generated about $11 billion in adjusted free cash flow. Thus, our cash return on Cisco will be $11 billion/$97.4 billion, or about 11%. 

 With 10-year Treasuries yielding just 1.7% and corporate bonds yielding a higher (but still paltry) 2.7% in October 2012, that 11% cash return for Cisco looks pretty good. Throw in the fact that Cisco's free cash flow is likely to grow over time, whereas those bond payments are fixed, and Cisco in October 2012 starts to look like a pretty solid value. 

 Cash return is a great first step to finding cash cows trading at reasonable prices, but avoid using cash return for financials or foreign stocks. Cash flow is not terribly meaningful for banks and other firms that earn money via their balance sheets. And because definitions of cash flow can vary widely in other countries, a foreign stock that looks cheap based on its cash return may simply be defining cash flow more liberally.

 The Bottom Line
 Even if you end up using the more thorough valuation methods highlighted in the next lessons, it will be highly likely you will use the ratios highlighted in this lesson when discussing stock valuation with other investors. Just remember the limitations of each of these ratios, and keep in mind the context of every situation.

